Mobile Device Connection Types and Accessories

Introduction to Mobile Device Connectivity

With every person you know and everyone in your organization walking around with a phone, a tablet, or even both of those, we need to have different ways to be able to connect these devices back to the computers and networks that we normally use. And of course, it seems that each device has a different way of connecting and communicating back to your computer. In this video, we'll look at wired connectivity, wireless connectivity, and all of the different standards and options that you might have available on today's mobile devices.

You'll find that these connections that we use for these mobile devices are used for more than simply charging the battery. We often might use them for connectivity and synchronization of the data on these devices. You might want to back up what's on that device or use it as a way to identify that the device is really yours.

Wired Connection Types

USB Connections

One of the most common ways to connect these mobile devices is using USB or the Universal Serial Bus. These are standard connections that we've used for years and years, and of course the connectors themselves have changed a bit as time has gone on. You'll find that there are different types of connections for USB.

For older devices, you may find the mini and micro USB plugs are very popular. These were certainly used on older mobile devices, but you may find even devices in use today are still using these very specific USB types. You may find, of course, that our mobile devices are getting smaller and smaller, but these interfaces are made for a much larger style of interface. And although many of our modern devices have migrated away from the micro B plug or the mini B plug, you may still use the USB Type A connection to plug into your computing device like your desktop computer or your laptop computer.

USB-C

More modern devices are still using the Universal Serial Bus, but they're using a newer version referred to as USB-C. This describes this physical connection of a USB-C plug. Inside of this connection are 24 pins, and they have the same style of connection regardless of how you might plug it in. This can easily replace the older USB 2.0 connection all the way up to the latest standard of USB, and we can even put different types of signals on this wire even though they are all using the same type of connector as its physical interface.

For example, you might find that this USB connection is used for more than just serial connectivity. You could see DisplayPort, HDMI, and Thunderbolt all can use that single connector to be able to transmit video data and other information. USB-C was designed to be a connector that's easy to use because you can plug it in in any orientation, and it also supports a higher speed than the older USB style connectors that we used to use.

Lightning Connector

If you're using an older mobile device used by Apple, you may not be using a USB connection. You may instead be using a proprietary connection from Apple known as a Lightning connector. This Lightning connector has eight pins and it's commonly used for older iPhone and iPad devices.

Lightning was introduced to resolve a number of problems with the older USB connection standard. For example, it supported a higher power output so it could charge your phones and your tablets a little bit faster. It can be inserted either way, so you don't have to keep moving the connector back and forth and up and down to try to find the right connection. And this relatively simple design made it easy to be able to use this across many different devices.

The challenge, of course, is that you might be using or supporting a number of different mobile devices from a number of different manufacturers, so you may be walking around with a lot of different connector types and cables inside of your bag just to be able to support all of these different components. This might change going forward as we move towards a single USB-C connector type instead of using these many and very different connections.

Wireless Connection Types

Near Field Communication (NFC)

If you want to communicate wirelessly, there are also a number of options available on your mobile device. One of those options is NFC or Near Field Communication. NFC is commonly used to transmit a little bit of data over a very short connection. NFC is often built into your phone, your tablet, and your smartwatch, and it's often used as payment systems for paying something at a point-of-sale terminal.

Or you might use it as identification to be able to gain access through a particular door or to be able to transfer information from one phone to another. Some organizations might have a sensor on the wall, and they use NFC in a watch or phone to be able to act as an access control. So instead of walking around with an ID card or a separate access card, you could simply use the phone that you're carrying anyway.

Bluetooth

If you're using wireless headsets or wireless keyboards and mice, then you're probably using Bluetooth. Bluetooth allows us to connect devices over a high-speed network at relatively short distances. Often we refer to this as a Personal Area Network or a PAN. This is commonly used for devices that we would personally use on that mobile device, things like tethering your smartphone to be able to connect wirelessly or using it to connect wireless headphones or headsets. All of these types of Bluetooth communications are designed for the individual, although it is possible to connect multiple phones and devices together using this Bluetooth networking technology.

Tethering and Hotspot

Another useful mobile connection type is to use your mobile phone as an internet router. If we have many people connecting to our mobile phone for internet access, we refer to that as a hotspot. If we simply have one device that is connecting to this mobile phone and that is the only device that's able to use that phone, we often refer to that as tethering. This is functionality that's commonly associated with the software in your phone and the capabilities from your phone provider, so you may want to contact your mobile provider for your telephone and find out if a hotspot functionality is something that you can use on your mobile device.

Mobile Device Accessories

Stylus and Drawing Accessories

Many of us have used our fingers to be able to manipulate the screen of our mobile phones or our tablets, but if you need a more precise input method, you might want to use a stylus. This digital stylus is like using a pencil or a pen, and you're able to get very granular and fine control of that information on the screen.

The stylus is usually connecting to the device over Bluetooth, so it's wireless, and you're often able to use pressure sensitivity and the buttons on the device to enable different functions. You do have to make sure that the stylus you're using is compatible with the device you're connecting to. So if you're using an Apple tablet, you have to make sure that you're using the Apple Pencil or something that is compatible with that particular tablet. This pairing usually creates the best possible connection and enables the most number of features for the person using that tablet.

Headsets and Audio Accessories

Instead of holding your mobile phone to your ear to be able to communicate, many people prefer to use a hands-free headset. This headset allows you to hear and to talk into a microphone, so it makes it very easy to have these phone conversations.

You might use a wired headset. Many devices use USB as a common headset type, or you may use the older analog connection over a TRRS connector. This is a Tip Ring Ring Sleeve connector. It's commonly a 3.2mm style connector. You might also hear this referred to as an analog audio jack.

If you're using an older model of an Apple iPhone, instead of using USB, you may need to use Lightning, and there are wired headsets available that have Lightning connectors at the end. And of course, there are many options for wireless headsets, and most of those headsets connect to your mobile device using Bluetooth.

The TRRS stands for Tip Ring Ring Sleeve, where the tip is the connection that's on the tip of that connector and the sleeve is the connector closest to the back sleeve of the connector. And with a TRRS, there are two connectors in the middle, and these are both the ring connectors.

Wireless headsets, of course, do not need any type of wires, so you might have something very simple that is battery powered and connected to your mobile device over Bluetooth. If you use that wireless headset all day, you may find that you run out of battery and you might have to shift over to the wired version of that headset.

Speakers and Audio Output

If you like to listen to music on your mobile phone, you may find that the speakers on the phone don't provide much fidelity. If that's the case for you, you might want to use wireless speakers, which provide a better sound over this battery-powered and portable speaker system. These are usually connected to your mobile device wirelessly using Bluetooth, which allows you to take this sound and move it anywhere you would like within the range of that mobile phone.

Webcams and Cameras

Many of our phones and tablets already include a camera or webcam built into the device itself, and many of our laptops also provide that functionality. If you have a desktop or laptop that does not have a camera or a webcam, there are options to include external third-party cameras into that device. Those will often connect to those devices over a USB connection.

Once you connect the camera or enable it on your mobile device, you're now able to use it in the applications. So this might be for simply capturing audio and video, or you might use it with an application to provide video and audio conferencing.

Docking Stations and Port Replicators

If you work in an office and you like to take your laptop home at night, you may find yourself unplugging all of the wires every day to be able to take the laptop home, and then when you come back to the office, you have to plug all of those wires back in again. These would be wires for your video connection, your mouse, your keyboard, perhaps your network link, and anything else that needs to be physically connected.

There are easier ways to perform that function using a docking station. Docking stations are a quick way to connect and disconnect the laptop without having to touch any of the cables that might be on that desk. They also often provide additional interface options, and you might even be able to plug in full-size interface cards into the docking station.

A docking station in our office has a monitor and a keyboard and a mouse, probably has a network connection on the back of this docking station, and we can simply bring our laptop in, place it on top of the docking station, and immediately start working. At the end of the day when we're ready to leave, we simply disconnect it from the docking station and leave all of the wires in place.

If you don't need support for additional adapter cards and you want something that's a bit more portable, you might want to use a port replicator. These are very similar to a docking station, but instead of getting a very specific docking station for a specific laptop, these port replicators are commonly connecting over a USB connection, making it something that you can use on almost any laptop or desktop computer. These are also relatively portable because you don't have to worry about them being very large and supporting those adapter cards.

This port replicator includes a lot of different connectors, including USB connections and audio. This one also supports micro SD and SD card reader built into the port replicator itself, and on the other side we have additional USB and video output options as well.

Trackpads and Input Devices

If you're using a laptop in a confined space, you may find it difficult to use an external mouse. For that reason, many mouse functions are built into today's laptops using a trackpad. The trackpad is usually a large area on the laptop that allows you to use your fingers to be able to move the mouse around without having an external mouse that takes up even more room.

If you like using the trackpad on your laptop, you can also use a trackpad on your desktop with an external trackpad. These are usually battery powered and they connect to your computer over a Bluetooth connection. Unlike a traditional mouse, a trackpad can provide you with other features that perhaps a mouse might not be able to do very easily. For example, you can use different finger options on the trackpad to expand or contract different things on the screen, which would be relatively difficult to do using a traditional mouse.

Many laptops will allow you to disable that trackpad using a function key. On this laptop, you can use a function F10 that you can see here with the blue icon, and that will enable or disable the use of that trackpad. That way you can continue to use the keyboard and know that you're not accidentally going to click anything on the screen from the trackpad.

If you like using a stylus on your tablet, then you might want to use that same technology on your laptop or desktop computer, and you can do that by using a drawing pad. This is an external digitizer that has its own stylus to give you the same precise input on a desktop or laptop computer that you might have on that tablet device. This is usually a third-party device that connects to your computer over Bluetooth or USB connection and allows for very precise input. So if you're someone who enjoys using a stylus or you need it to provide some type of artistic input, this might be a good solution for your laptop or your desktop computer.
